---
layout: post
title: 'Is Game Journalism Getting Worse?'
image: /assets/images/worse.png
tags:
  - Analysis
  - Opinion
  - Evan
author: Evan Price
comments: false
---

It is not an uncommon sentiment that the state of games journalism has degraded over time since its inception. People feel that the credibility and depth of game journalism has become more and more lacking with any improvement to the field out of sight. The relevant question to ask though is if this is really the case?

One of the most common complaints about modern game journalism is the rampancy of clickbait. Be it in titles, descriptions, thumbnails, or all of the above, clickbait is found everywhere in the scene. Sentences are written entirely capitalized and in bright colors. Statements are thrown around like “Must see\!”, “This will change everything\!”, and “So overpowered\!” are designed to capitalize on people’s curiosity or fear of missing out. These videos are likely to be entirely without substance, but the only thing that matters is that it gets views. This monetization style for content encourages and rewards this use of clickbait and ensures that it will continue to see use. Further, more lengthy and complex videos are punished by the algorithm by being recommended less. While this is a general problem with platforms like Youtube that affects much more than just video games, it is certainly felt intensely in the gaming scene.

Another reason that people complain is that many journalists seem to have a lack of understanding or skill at video games. They might complain about the difficulty of a game while not taking the time to learn its mechanics or even falsely report on things via misunderstandings or negligence. Where it was previously common for journalists to feature in game magazines, creating in-depth guides and reviews that spanned pages and content that was both insightful and satisfying. 

These phenomena could have a variety of causes, but one of the most influential is that it is becoming more and more difficult to make a living through game journalism. Media companies, seeing the rise of popularity in gaming decades ago, started creating sections of articles dedicated to games. In time, entire articles would be dedicated to it and companies themselves like *IGN* and *Gamespot* became centered around gaming. Now though, these companies are beginning to downsize. For example, as of January 24th 2023, The Washington Post discontinued their section of the newspaper dedicated to video games known as *Launcher*. This trend has continued with websites like *The Escapist* and *Kotaku*. The introduction of AI is reducing the perceived need for journalists even further by making it easier for a reduced workforce to produce the same amount of content. 

## Sources

[“You Can’t Work for Somebody Who Doesn’t Exist”: The Decline of Games Journalism and the](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/15554120241273332) 

[Rise of Independent Gaming News \- Ryan Stanton, Mark R Johnson, 2024](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/15554120241273332)

[Game Journalism Layoffs: Everyone Suffers Without Expert Criticism - PCMag](https://www.pcmag.com/opinions/video-games-need-video-game-journalism)