---
layout: post
title: 'Why Not Every Game Needs an Easy Mode'
image: /assets/images/easy.png
tags:
  - Analysis
  - Opinion
  - Evan
author: Evan
comments: false
---

It has been a point of contention in recent years over whether all video games should include an easy mode, and this dialogue has only grown louder from the increasing popularity of challenging games like Dark Souls, Elden Ring, and Cuphead. While accessibility is very important for any game, not every game needs an easy mode.

Video games are more than just entertainment—they are art. Just as a film director or novelist makes deliberate choices to evoke specific emotions, game developers craft experiences that challenge and engage players in unique ways. For some games, difficulty is not an obstacle but a core part of their identity. Take Dark Souls, for example. Its gameplay centers around the memorization of attack patterns and the fine tuning of your build in order to overcome challenging bosses. Adding an easy mode could diminish the emotional weight of these victories. The challenge is the point—it’s a deliberate narrative tool. In Dark Souls specifically, you are in the context of the story supposed to be hugely out of your depth. You are fighting legends, monsters, and even gods as the ultimate underdog. Death isn’t just a possibility, it is the expectation.

Hard games push players to think critically, experiment, and improve. They encourage perseverance and problem-solving, often resulting in a deeply rewarding experience. This sense of mastery is a defining feature of certain genres, such as roguelikes or soulsborne games. For example, in Cuphead, navigating the game’s difficult platforming and combat builds a sense of immersion in its colorful and whimsical, but brutally challenging world. The challenge helps players connect with the protagonist's journey—success feels earned, not handed to you. When games universally include an easy mode, it can create a perception that the original difficulty was a barrier, not an integral part of the experience.

Developing multiple difficulty levels isn’t just a toggle switch either—it often requires rebalancing mechanics, designing new AI behavior, and extensive testing. For indie developers working with limited resources, implementing an easy mode could detract from their ability to focus on the core gameplay experience. Moreover, for developers who see their games as a specific experience, an easy mode might feel like compromising their artistic intent. 

The push for easy modes in all games stems from a well-meaning desire to make gaming inclusive, but it overlooks the importance of creative vision and the diversity of player experiences. Not every game needs to cater to every person, and that’s part of what makes gaming such a rich and varied medium. Instead of expecting every game to include an easy mode, we should celebrate the wide array of games available and advocate for meaningful accessibility features.

