---
layout: post
title: 'Why Is The Trust In Game Journalism Decreasing?'
image: /assets/images/trust.png
tags:
  - Analysis
  - Meta
  - Matthew
author: Matthew Rops
comments: false
---

Game journalists, once perceived as integral to determining the quality of a game, are now looked at with distrust. Why has this once reputable field fallen into disrepute? Critics of game journalism cite many claims for why trust in game journalism has decreased including complaints of reviews being too subjective, too inconsistent, lacking depth, and favoring popular games over indie games. Others criticize the qualifications of the authors stating that their only expertise is their game time. I believe that the issue with game journalism incorporates all of these issues, but the root of the problem lies in the lack of transparency in game journalism

Companies like IGN, TheGamer, and Kotaku are major players in the game journalism world and as such draw in large amounts of money. They receive advertising revenue from game developers and exclusive previews, which raises concerns about whether the benefits game developers give affects the journalist’s review of said game. This issue is exemplified when a review of a game is drastically different from the game’s community’s opinion such as when Diablo Immortal’s microtransactions were downplayed by some gaming journalist outlets, but harshly criticized by the playerbase. Unless game journalists can provide transparency behind their financing and prove that their reviews aren’t influenced by any external factor, any benefit that journalists receive from game developers will cause their review to be eyed with suspicion. 

Issues also lie in the perception of game journalists as well. Gamers oftentimes don’t know the qualifications and in the case of IGN reviews, the journalists don’t provide qualifications and oftentimes don’t post their playtime on the game they review. Thus, when a game receives a controversial rating, critics line up to state that the journalist barely played the game or didn’t play at all. Gamers need to know why they should trust the person who is reviewing the game. Journalists need to establish their credibility by stating their background and listing their playtime in the game they’re reviewing. 

Game journalists’ audience, gamers, don’t know the author that writes the reviews, doesn’t know whether there are additional influences on the reviews, and thus don’t know why they should trust the review. They’d rather go to influencers that they know on social media or to the game’s community itself such as with steam game reviews. In order to regain gamers’ trust, game journalists need to establish their credibility and companies like IGN, TheGamer, and Kotaku need to be transparent in their dealings with game developers.

[The Fall of Gaming Journalism - Medium](https://medium.com/@averageguymedianow/the-fall-of-gaming-journalism-7b1c43e572f9)