---
layout: post
title: 'Is Sponsored Journalism Ethical?'
image: /assets/images/he-used-ai.png
tags:
  - Analysis
  - Opinion
  - Evan Price
author: Evan
comments: false
---

Whether or not sponsored video game journalism is ethical is a hotly debated topic within the industry. Being impartial is critical to journalism of any kind but whether or not that impartiality is possible to maintain while being impartial is not clear. This article will attempt to break this question of the integrity of sponsored journalism down. 

As previously stated, being impartial is imperative to any credible journalism. Having and displaying bias compromises the credibility of a journalist. When bias is introduced, it may sway the opinion of any watchers, listeners, readers, or media consumers of any kind in a direction they may not have otherwise taken without this bias. It does not allow a person to come to their own conclusions and formulate their own thoughts. 

Publishers and developers will often fund journalists to cover their own video games. They may pay for popular Youtubers or streamers in order to boost its popularity and to push the game further into the public eye. While doing this, they may also give the promoter certain stipulations and limits as to what they can say about the game. This is not the case for all publishers, but many publishers may strongly discourage the promoter from saying negative things pertaining to the game and encourage them to over-express things they enjoy about the game. This immediately promotes bias in the reviewer further even than just having someone play the game for their audience.

However, sponsorship can be a necessity if ad revenue is not enough to sustain operations by itself. When done responsibly, a sponsorship can provide much needed support for new journalists and journalism outlets. When many video game journalism outlets are currently being downsized or closed and the trend shows no sign of stopping, a sponsorship could be the difference between opportunity and failure. With this in mind it is more understandable why a journalist would risk skepticism from readers by accepting a sponsorship.

One way to utilize a sponsorship while maintaining journalistic integrity is by emphasizing transparency. While not telling your audience that you are being sponsored to cover a video game is misleading, informing your audience about this helps to temper their expectations and allows them to better evaluate the content being shown to them. In addition to this, the establishment of boundaries to ensure that the sponsorship does not force a journalist to react or promote it a certain way are imperative to maintaining an unbiased review.

## Sources

[Why Sponsored Content Is Bad For Journalism - Cognoscenti](https://www.wbur.org/cognoscenti/2013/03/19/native-advertising-journalism-john-carroll)

[The Transactional Nature of "Game Journalism" \- Game Wisdom](https://game-wisdom.com/critical/transactional-game-journalism)

[Metajournalistic discourse on the rise of gaming journalism \- Gregory Perreault, Tim Vos, 2020](https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/1461444819858695)
